.\" faxview.man -- manual page for FAXview.
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1995 Ralph Schleicher <rs@purple.in-ulm.de>
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\" Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.\"
.\"
.TH faxview 1 "November 9, 1995"
.UC 4
.SH NAME
faxview \- a simple file dialog for managing fax messages.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B faxview
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B FAXview
is a user interface to view, print and delete incoming fax messages.
You should be able to use
.B FAXview
if you know how to handle a serial pointing device (some aliens call
such devices \`mouse\').  Thus, stop reading here unless you want to
know the secrets of live, the universe and anything else.

There are five major regions in the dialog.  The top-most entry-field
labeled
.B Selected\ filenames
displays the currently selected filename.  Multiple filenames have to be
separated with spaces.  All names are relative to the current working
directory and may contain globbing patterns.  Typing
.I Return
in the entry-field invokes the viewing command on all selected files.

The second entry-field labeled
.B Type\ of\ file
and the two list-boxes
.B Files
and
.B Directories
represent the actual file dialog.  You can select a file from the
.B Files
list-box with a single-click on the first mouse-button.  A double-click
invokes the viewing command on the file underneath the mouse cursor.
Dragging the mouse while holding mouse-button one down selects multiple
files.  A double-click in the
.B Directories
list-box changes the current working directory and updates the contents of
the list-boxes.  The globbing pattern specified in the
.B Type\ of\ file
entry-field controls the contents of the
.B Files
list-box (entering a directory name selects all files in that directory;
things like \`~user\' are of course allowed).  Typing
.I Return
in the
.B Type\ of\ file
entry-field updates the contents of the
.B Files
and
.B Directories
list-boxes.  The
.B Collect\ pages
check-button of the
.B Files
list-box controls whether multiple filenames with a unique base-name are
listed on a single line using a brace globbing pattern or not.  Enabling
this feature is the only way to view multiple files with a simple
double-click.  This appeals to the laziness of most users.

The two entry-fields
.B Viewing\ command
and
.B Printing\ command
below the file dialog specify the command to be used for viewing and
printing the selected files.  The check-button
.B Single\ filenames
decides whether the token
.B $f
will be replaced with all selected filenames or if the command will be
invoked for each filename separately.  You must put an ampersand
.B &
at the end of the command line if you want to execute the command
asynchronously.  You also have to obey the rules of the Tcl-command
.B exec
if you want to redirect any file handles.  Example entries for viewing
and printing are

     xli -pixmap $f &

and

     g3topbm $f | pbmtolps | lpr &

The
.I Return
key is bound to invoke the entered command within these two entry-fields.

The last window named
.B Process\ information
logs most actions and it is used to display warning and error messages,
too.  You can control if the lines should be truncated or wrapped with
the check-box
.BR Wrap\ lines .

After all, there are six push-buttons at the bottom of the dialog.  The
.B View
and
.B Print
button invoke the corresponding command from the
.B Viewing\ command
and
.B Printing\ command
entry-fields.  The
.B Remove
button deletes the selected files after your confirmation.  The
.B Update
button can be used to re-read the contents of the current directory.
You can go back to your startup directory with the
.B Home
button (in case you get lost in the file system).  The right-most button
.B Exit
terminates
.BR FAXview .
This event is globally bound to the
.I Escape
key, too.
.SH OPTIONS
There are none.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
See the manual page of your shell for how to set environment variables.
.TP
.B FAXVIEW
The startup directory of
.BR FAXview .
Users who get their fax messages delivered from a real fax administrator
can set this variable to their own spool directory.  The directory
\`/var/spool/fax/incoming\' will be used as the startup directory if the
.B FAXVIEW
variable is not set.
.SH SEE\ ALSO
.B Tcl/Tk
is a programming system for developing GUI applications written by John
K. Ousterhout.  You need at least the windowing shell
.B wish(1)
to run
.BR faxview(1) .

.B mgetty(1)
from the
.B mgetty+sendfax
package written by Gert Döring <gert@greenie.muc.de> allows to use a fax
modem for receiving fax messages and handling external logins without
interfering with outgoing calls.

.BR xli(1) ,\  xloadimage(1) ,\  xv(1)
and
.B display(1)
(the last one is from the
.B ImageMagick
package) can be used to view fax pages under X directly.  All these
programs are much slower than
.B viewfax(1)
(AKA
.BR viewfax(1) )
written by Frank D. Cringle <fdc@cliwe.ping.de> because it is highly
optimized for fax messages received by
.B mgetty(1)
(it takes less than a second to display an average fax page).

.B g3topbm(1)
from the
.BR pbmplus ,\  netpbm
or
.B mgetty+sendfax
package may help you to convert a fax page into other formats.
.SH BUGS
Bugs are by far the largest and most successful class of
entity.  (Prof. Snopes' Encyclopedia of Animal Life)
.SH AUTHOR
Ralph Schleicher <rs@purple.in-ulm.de>.

.B FAXview
is free software and comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY; see the GNU
General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation for
details.
