.TH pppoa2 "8" "May 2004" "SpeedTouch USB driver"
.SH NAME
pppoa2 \- ppp(d) PPP over ATM interface for SpeedTouch USB and SpeedTouch 330 modem
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pppoa2
[\fIOPTION\fR]... -vpi value1 -vci value2
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fBpppoa2\fR allows ppp(d) to communicate with the SpeedTouch USB modem through a PTY interface. It manages PPP encapsulation into ATM cells, which are then send as aal5 packets to the modem through the USB bus.
.PP
You have to carefully set your \fBvpi\fR and \fBvci\fR values according to your country settings.
.PP
Here are some values :

vpi.vci = 8.48 for Netherlands
          8.35 for France
          8.67 for France (bis)
          8.35 for Belgium
          8.35 for Italy
          0.38 for UK
.SH MANDATORY
.TP
\fB\-vpi\fR vpi_value
Defines vpi value

.TP
\fB\-vci\fR vci_value
Defines vci value

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-b\fR
Bridging 1483 mode (PPPoE support).

.TP
\fB\-d device\fR
Defines which USB device should be used as the SpeedTouch USB modem. On Linux, this is something like /proc/bus/usb/003/006. Usefull when using more than one modem on the same machine.

.TP
\fB\-e\fR alternate_number
Use an alternate endpoint interface. The value 1 is used if nothing is specified as it works with all modem revision. If you specify -1, no alternate endpoint interface will be selected, using the one selected by the system.

.TP
\fB\-f\fR filename
Defines the \fBpppoa2\fR log file name (by default /var/log/pppoa2.log). This option is not available if syslog is used (default at compile time).

.TP
\fB\-v\fR number
Verbosity level
    \- 0 Main messages + Error messages
    \- 1 level 0 + State/Warnings messages
    \- 2 level 1 + More debug info
    \- 3 level 2 + USB packet dumping (can cause driver crash)

.TP
\fB\-\-help\fR
display this help and exit

.SH RETURN VALUES
.TP
0 on success, any other value on failure
.SH SEE ALSO
.TP
\fBmodem_run(8)\fR, \fBpppoa3(8)\fR
.SH AUTHOR
SpeedTouch USB driver development team.
