##
##   ____  __  _ _____ ____     _ _            _   
##  / ___||  \/ |_   _|  _ \___| (_) ___ _ __ | |_ 
##  \___ \| |\/| || | | |_)/ __| | |/ _ \ '_ \| __|
##   ___) | |  | || | |  _| (__| | |  __/ | | | |_ 
##  |____/|_|  |_||_| |_|  \___|_|_|\___|_| |_|\__|
##   
##  SMTPclient -- simple SMTP client
##
##  This program is a minimal SMTP client that takes an email
##  message body and passes it on to a SMTP server (default is the
##  MTA on the local host). Since it is completely self-supporting,
##  it is especially suitable for use in restricted environments.
##
##  ======================================================================
##
##  Copyright (c) 1997 Ralf S. Engelschall, All rights reserved.
##
##  This program is free software; it may be redistributed and/or modified
##  only under the terms of either the Artistic License or the GNU General
##  Public License, which may be found in the SMTP source distribution.
##  Look at the file COPYING. 
##
##  This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
##  WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
##  MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
##  GNU General Public License for more details.
##
##  ======================================================================
##
##  smtpclient.pod -- manual page source
##

=head1 NAME

smtpclient -- simple SMTP client

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<smtpclient> 
[B<-s> I<STR>]
[B<-f> I<ADDR>]
[B<-r> I<ADDR>]
[B<-e> I<ADDR>]
[B<-c> I<ADDR>]
[B<-S> I<HOST>]
[B<-P> I<NUM>]
[B<-M>]
[B<-L>]
[B<-v>]
I<recipient> ...

B<smtpclient> 
[B<-V>]
[B<-h>]

=head1 VERSION

@V@

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<SMTPclient> is a minimal SMTP client that takes an email message body and
passes it on to a SMTP server (default is the MTA on the local host). Since it
is completely self-supporting, it is especially suitable for use in restricted
environments.

A typical usage is as a MTA emulating program on a dedicated webserver.  There
it is usually called from within a CGI program to receive a mail (constructed
by the CGI program out of a HTML form) and to forward it to the actual
mailserver.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<-s>, B<--subject=>I<STR>

Specifies the C<Subject:> header. This gives the message a title. Default is
no subject.

=item B<-f>, B<--from=>I<ADDR>

Specifies the C<From:> address header. This is the logical senders address.
Default is ``C<daemon>'', which is probably wrong.

=item B<-r>, B<--reply-to=>I<ADDR>

Specifies the C<Reply-To:> address header. This is where replies should be
send to. Default is no such header.

=item B<-e>, B<--errors-to=>I<ADDR>

Specifies the C<Errors-To:> address header. This is where delivery
problems should be reported. Default is no such header.

=item B<-c>, B<--carbon-copy=>I<ADDR>

Specifies the C<Cc:> address header. This can contain one or more addresses
(seperated by comma) to which one copy of the message is send to. Default is
no such header.

=item B<-S>, B<--smtp-host=>I<HOST>

Specifies the name or IP-address of the SMTP host to connect to. This is the
host where the MTA is running to which the message is forwarded. By default,
the mail is send to the SMTP daemon on C<localhost> or to the host specified
in the environment-variable C<SMTPSERVER> if exists.

=item B<-P>, B<--smtp-port=>I<NUM>

Specifies the port of the SMTP host to connect to. Default is port 25 (smtp).

=item B<-M>, B<--mime-encode>

Use MIME-style translation to quoted-printable (base 16).

=item B<-L>, B<--use-syslog>

Log errors to system's I<syslog> facility instead of F<stderr>.

=item B<-v>, B<--verbose>

Turn on verbose logging to F<stdout>.

=item B<-V>, B<--version>

Display the program version.

=item B<-h>, B<--help>

Display the usage page.

=back

=head1 RESULTS

The program terminates with a non-zero exit status in case of errors. 

=head1 AUTHOR

 Ralf S. Engelschall
 rse@engelschall.com
 www.engelschall.com

=cut

##EOF##
