.TH "stringprep_ucs4_to_utf8" 3 "0.5.2" "libidn" "libidn"
.SH NAME
stringprep_ucs4_to_utf8
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <stringprep.h>
.sp
.BI "char * stringprep_ucs4_to_utf8(const uint32_t * " str ", ssize_t " len ", size_t * " items_read ", size_t * " items_written ");"
.SH ARGUMENTS
.IP "const uint32_t * str" 12
 a UCS-4 encoded string
.IP "ssize_t len" 12
 the maximum length of 
.I "str "
to use. If 
.I "len "
< 0, then
the string is terminated with a 0 character.
.IP "size_t * items_read" 12
 location to store number of characters read read, or 
.I "NULL"
.
.IP "size_t * items_written" 12
 location to store number of bytes written or 
.I "NULL"
.
The value here stored does not include the trailing 0
byte.
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
Convert a string from a 32-bit fixed width representation as UCS-4.
to UTF-8. The result will be terminated with a 0 byte.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
 a pointer to a newly allocated UTF-8 string.
This value must be freed with 
.B "free()"
. If an
error occurs, 
.I "NULL"
 will be returned and

.I "error "
set.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <bug-libidn@gnu.org>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2002, 2003, 2004 Simon Josefsson.
.br
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
The full documentation for
.B libidn
is maintained as a Texinfo manual.  If the
.B info
and
.B libidn
programs are properly installed at your site, the command
.IP
.B info libidn
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual.
