.TH "tld_check_4z" 3 "0.5.2" "libidn" "libidn"
.SH NAME
tld_check_4z
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <tld.h>
.sp
.BI "int tld_check_4z(const uint32_t * " in ", size_t * " errpos ", const Tld_table ** " overrides ");"
.SH ARGUMENTS
.IP "const uint32_t * in" 12
 Zero-terminated array of unicode code points to process.
.IP "size_t * errpos" 12
 Position of offending character is returned here.
.IP "const Tld_table ** overrides" 12
 An array of additional domain restriction structures
that complement and supersede the built-in information.
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
Test each of the code points in 
.I "in "
for whether or not they are
allowed by the information in 
.I "overrides "
or by the built-in TLD
restriction data. When data for the same TLD is available both
internally and in 
.I "overrides, "
the information in 
.I "overrides "
takes
precedence. If several entries for a specific TLD are found, the
first one is used.  If 
.I "overrides "
is 
.I "NULL"
, only the built-in
information is used.  The position of the first offending character
is returned in 
.I "errpos."
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
 Returns 
.I "TLD_SUCCESS"
 if all code points
are valid or when 
.I "tld "
is null, 
.I "TLD_INVALID"
 if a
character is not allowed, or additional error codes on
general failure conditions.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <bug-libidn@gnu.org>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2002, 2003, 2004 Simon Josefsson.
.br
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
The full documentation for
.B libidn
is maintained as a Texinfo manual.  If the
.B info
and
.B libidn
programs are properly installed at your site, the command
.IP
.B info libidn
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual.
