.TH "tld_check_4t" 3 "0.5.2" "libidn" "libidn"
.SH NAME
tld_check_4t
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <tld.h>
.sp
.BI "int tld_check_4t(const uint32_t * " in ", size_t " inlen ", size_t * " errpos ", const Tld_table * " tld ");"
.SH ARGUMENTS
.IP "const uint32_t * in" 12
 Array of unicode code points to process. Does not need to be
zero terminated.
.IP "size_t inlen" 12
 Number of unicode code points.
.IP "size_t * errpos" 12
 Position of offending character is returned here.
.IP "const Tld_table * tld" 12
 Data structure representing the restrictions for
which the input should be tested.
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
Test each of the code points in 
.I "in "
for whether or not
they are allowed by the data structure in 
.I "tld, "
return
the position of the first character for which this is not
the case in 
.I "errpos."
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
 Returns 
.I "TLD_SUCCESS"
 if all code points
are valid or when 
.I "tld "
is null, 
.I "TLD_INVALID"
 if a
character is not allowed, or additional error codes on
general failure conditions.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Report bugs to <bug-libidn@gnu.org>.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2002, 2003, 2004 Simon Josefsson.
.br
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
The full documentation for
.B libidn
is maintained as a Texinfo manual.  If the
.B info
and
.B libidn
programs are properly installed at your site, the command
.IP
.B info libidn
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual.
