.\"
.\" Written by Rasca, Berlin 2001
.\" Published under the GNU GPL V2
.\"
.TH VIDCAT 1 "Oct 2001" "GNU" "Version VERSION"
.SH NAME
vidcat - capture a frame from a video4linux device

.SH SYNOPSIS
.BI "vidcat [-h?blgV] [-d "<device> "] [-f "jpeg|ppm|png "] [-i "tv|comp1|com1|s-video "] [-n "pal|ntsc|secam "] [-q "<1..100> "] [-s "WIDTHxHEIGHT "] [-o "<file> "]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I vidcat
captures a frame from a video4linux device and writes
the result to the standard output device. With the following
options you can define output format, size etc..
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
-d device
Use an alternate v4l device, '/dev/video' is the default device.
.TP
-b
This applies only to PPM output. With this option the PPM
ouput is written in binary mode.
.TP
-f ppm|jpeg|png|yuv4mpeg
Define the file format to use for the output stream. The
default is "jpeg".
.TP
-g
Use greyscale instead of RGB24 for the output data.
.TP
-i tv|comp1|comp2|s-video
Set the input channel to use. The default value is none,
which means the preset of the device is used.
.TP
-l
Loops until CTRL+C is pressed. This is the default for
the YUV4MPEG output.
.TP
-n pal|ntsc|secam
Select the input norm for the grabbing device. The
default value is none.
.TP
-o file
Use the named file for output instead of standard out.
.TP
-p c|g|y|Y
Set the palette to use: c = RGB24, g=GREY, y=YUV420P, Y=YUV422P.
.TP
-q 1..100
Set the quality for JPEG output. The value could
be a number between 1 and 100. The default value is 80.
.TP
-s WIDTHxHEIGHT
Define the size of the output frame in pixels. The default
setting is 320x240.
.TP
-V
Show version number and exit.
.SH AUTHOR
Rasca
.br
http://home.pages.de/~rasca/
.br
VIDCAT is published under the GNU General Public License

