.TH vgetty 8 "$Date: 2001/12/22 18:43:22 $" "version 0.60" "vgetty manual"
.IX vgetty

.SH NAME
vgetty \- voice extension to the mgetty+sendfax program

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vgetty
.RB [ options ]
.RI ttydevice

.B vgetty
is not meant to be run from the command line. It should be
run from the /etc/inittab file so it can respawn after each
call. Here is a typical inittab entry:

S0:345:respawn:/usr/local/sbin/vgetty ttyS0

If you already have a line in your inittab file which invokes
.B mgetty,
replace it with
.B vgetty,
since it replaces/extends its functionality.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B vgetty
is an extension to the mgetty+sendfax program which provides
an interface to voice-capable modems. Use it to operate your
modem as a simple answering machine or build your own
sophisticated voice messaging system.
.B vgetty
handles all the voice-modem specific protocols, giving
application programs a uniform, modem-independent voice
library. Supported modems include many common serial modems
from 3com/USRobotics, Elsa, Multitech, ZyXEL, and others.
Caller ID and Distinctive Ring are supported provided you
have subscribed to these services from your phone company.
Software-based modems (winmodems) are not supported.

.B vgetty
comes with tools to convert au/wav/voc sound files to/from
the format used by most supported modems. Basic editing and
filtering of sound files is included as well. See
.B pvf(1)
for more information.
.SH OPTIONS
.B vgetty
accepts the same options as
.B mgetty.
The one's relevant to voice mode are given here.
See
.B mgetty(8)
for other options related to data and fax modes.
.TP
.B -a
Use autobauding (change port speed to modem CONNECT speed).
There is no voice modem that needs this, the option is just
documented for completeness.
.TP
.B "-m 'expect send ...'"
Set the chat sequence that is used to initialize the modem.
For an empty expect part, use empty double quotes ("").
Since the sequence contains spaces, you will have to enclose
all of it in single quotes (''). Example:

vgetty -m '"" ATH0 OK'
.TP
.B "-n <rings>"
Set the number of rings after which
.B vgetty
will answer the phone
.TP
.B "-s <speed>"
Set the serial port speed to use, e.g. "-s 38400". This is
the speed of communication between the computer and modem in
bits/sec (baud).
.TP
.B "-x <log level>"
Set the log verbosity level. Zero (0) means no logging, six
(6) is really noisy. Use level six (6) when sending problem
reports to the maintainer. The log file is
.I /var/log/vgetty.ttyXX.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.B vgetty
sets the following environment variables when calling
external programs:
.TP
.B CALLER_ID
The caller's telephone number.
.TP
.B CALLED_ID
The number the caller has dialed. Useful for ISDN with
multiple incoming phone numbers on the same physical line.
.TP
.B CONNECT
The connect string as reported by the modem (e.g.
"38400/V.32bis/V.42bis ... ", etc.).
.TP
.B DEVICE
The tty device being used (e.g. "ttyS0"). Useful for
handling multiple devices ("messages on this line are for
work, messages on the other line are personal").
.SH RESOURCES
.B vgetty
is included in the
.B mgetty+sendfax
distribution. For the latest release, go to:

ftp://alpha.greenie.net/mgetty/source

The
.B vgetty
maintainer's home page is at:

http://www-internal.alphanet.ch/~schaefer/vgetty.html

Send problem reports to:

vgetty-maintainer@alphanet.ch

For information on
.B mgetty,
go to:

http://alpha.greenie.net/mgetty

The
.B mgetty
mailing list is at mgetty@muc.de. The mailing list is mirrored
to the de.alt.comm.mgetty newsgroup.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/mgetty+sendfax/voice.conf
Main configuration file for
.B vgetty.
Many options here override the equivalents found in
.I /etc/mgetty+sendfax/mgetty.config
.TP
.I /etc/nologin.ttyXX
If this file exists,
.B vgetty
will not answer calls on device ttyXX.
.TP
.I /var/log/vgetty.ttyXX
Debug log file for
.B vgetty.
.TP
.I /var/spool/voice/messages/Index
List of greeting messages to use.
.TP
.I /var/spool/voice/.code
Access code for remote playback of messages using the
dtmf.sh script
.TP
.I /var/spool/voice/.flag
.B vgetty
touches this file when a new message is received
.TP
.I /var/spool/voice/.timestamp
Used by the dtmf.sh script to record last time of message
playback

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
If
.B vgetty
doesn't work they way you think it should, check the log file.
By default, it is located in
.I /var/log/vgetty.ttyXX
(for the vgetty process handling device ttyXX, e.g. ttyS0).
.SH BUGS
.B vgetty
supports most standard voice modems, but many modems are not
fully compliant with relevant standards or contain firmware
bugs. If you have problems, try upgrading your modem to the
latest firmware revision. If you discover a bug with how
.B vgetty
reacts to your modem, please email the maintainer
(vgetty-maintainer@alphanet.ch) describing your problem.
Include relevant excerpts from the log file (set log level
to six first), and details about your modem (including
firmware revision) and operating system.
.SH SEE ALSO
.B mgetty(8), pvf(1)
.SH COPYRIGHT
.B vgetty
is Copyright (c) 1997-2001 Marc Schaefer (schaefer@alphanet.ch)
and many others, before and after.

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
the License, or (at your option) any later version.

This man page was written by Barry Stewart <bstewart@smyrnacable.net>,
and has CVS version: $Id: vgetty.8,v 1.1 2001/12/22 18:43:22 marcs Exp $



