.\" Copyright (C) 1998 David A. Hinds -- dahinds@users.sourceforge.net
.\" cardmgr.8 1.39 2001/03/05 04:10:49
.\"
.TH CARDMGR 8 "2001/03/05 04:10:49" "pcmcia-cs"
.SH NAME
cardmgr \- PCMCIA device manager
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cardmgr
.RB [ -V ]
.RB [ -q ]
.RB [ -d ]
.RB [ -o ]
.RB [ -f ]
.RB [ -v ]
[\fB\-c \fIconfigpath\fR]
[\fB\-m \fImodpath\fR]
[\fB\-p \fIpidfile\fR]
[\fB\-s\ \fIstabfile\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBCardmgr\fR monitors PCMCIA sockets for card insertion and removal
events.  When a card is inserted, \fBcardmgr\fR looks up the card in a
database of known cards.  If the card can be identified, appropriate
device drivers will be loaded and bound to the card.  When a card is
ejected, that card's drivers will be shut down and unloaded if
possible.  Based on the contents of the PCMCIA card configuration
database, \fBcardmgr\fR may also execute arbitrary commands when
appropriate cards are either inserted or removed.
.PP
All insertion and removal events, device driver loads and unloads, and
startup and shutdown commands are reported in the system log file.
Warnings and errors will also be logged.  Current card and device
information for each socket is recorded in \fI/var/lib/pcmcia/stab\fR.
.PP
Normally, when a card is identified, \fBcardmgr\fR will send a beep to
the console.  A beep is also generated when a card is successfully
configured.  A beep of lower pitch is generated if either of these
steps fails.  Ejecting a card produces a single beep.
.PP
When \fBcardmgr\fR receives a \fBSIGHUP\fR signal, it will reload its
configuration file.  When \fBcardmgr\fR receives a \fBSIGTERM\fR
signal, it will shut down all sockets that are not busy and then exit,
but drivers for busy sockets will stay loaded.
.PP
If the \fBPCMCIA_OPTS\fR environment variable is set, its contents
will be parsed after the main card configuration file is read.
.PP
At startup, \fBcardmgr\fR requires that \fI/tmp\fR reside on a
filesystem that permits special device files (i.e., a real linux
filesystem, that is not mounted "nodev").

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-V
Show version information and exit.
.TP
.B \-q
Quiet mode: don't beep when cards are inserted.
.TP
.B \-v
Verbose mode: generates more informational messages during normal
operation.  Configuration scripts are executed with VERBOSE=y.
.TP
.B \-d
Follow module dependencies when loading driver modules, by defaulting
to use \fBmodprobe\fR instead of \fBinsmod\fR.  Normally, \fBcardmgr
\fR will try using \fBmodprobe\fR only after an unsuccessful attempt
with \fBinsmod\fR.
.TP
.B \-f
Foreground: do not fork and run as a daemon until after configuring
any cards that are already present.
.TP
.B \-o
One pass: configure cards that are present, then exit.  This flag
also forces \fBcardmgr\fR to run in the foreground.
.TP
\fB\-c \fIconfigpath\fR
Look for the card configuration database and card configuration
scripts in the specified directory, instead of \fI/etc/pcmcia\fR.
.TP
\fB\-m \fImodpath\fR
Look for loadable kernel modules in the specified directory, instead
of \fI/lib/modules/`uname -r`\fR.
.TP
\fB\-p \fIpidfile\fR
Write the PID of the cardmgr process to the specified file, instead of
\fI/var/run/cardmgr.pid\fR.
.TP
\fB\-s \fIstabfile\fR
Write current socket information to the specified file, instead of
\fI/var/lib/pcmcia/stab\fR.

.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP \w'/etc/pcmcia/config.opts\ \ \ \|\|'u
/etc/pcmcia/config
Card configuration database
.TP
/etc/pcmcia/config.opts
Local resource settings for PCMCIA devices
.TP
/var/run/cardmgr.pid
PID of active cardmgr process
.TP
/var/lib/pcmcia/stab
Current card and device information for each socket.

.SH AUTHOR
David Hinds \- dahinds@users.sourceforge.net
.SH "SEE ALSO"
pcmcia(5), stab(5), cardctl(8), cardinfo(1).
