.\" Copyright (C) 1998 David A. Hinds -- dahinds@users.sourceforge.net
.\" ibmtr_cs.4 1.5 2000/06/12 21:24:47
.\"
.TH IBMTR_CS 4 "2000/06/12 21:24:47" "pcmcia-cs"
.SH NAME
ibmtr_cs \- IBM Token Ring PCMCIA device driver
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B insmod ibmtr_cs.o
.RB [ pc_debug=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ mmiobase=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ srambase=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ ringspeed=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ irq_list=\c
.IR i,j,... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ibmtr_cs
is the low-level Card Services driver for the IBM Token Ring network
adapter and a few very similar cards.  When this driver is attached to
a card, it allocates the next available token ring interface
.RB ( tr0 .. tr# ).
This
device name will be reported in the kernel log file, and passed on to
.BR cardmgr (8).
.P
Due to awkward design of the kernel ibmtr driver, the shared packet
memory for these cards must be mapped to a memory address below 1MB or
0x100000.  The PCMCIA software will attempt to do this automatically,
but the automatic algorithm may choose values that conflict with other
system devices, so a manual override with the
.B srambase
parameter may be required.  The memory-mapped IO window generally will
not be a problem.
.SH PARAMETERS
.TP
.BI pc_debug= n
Selects the PCMCIA debugging level.  This parameter is only available
if the module is compiled with debugging enabled.  A non-zero value
enables debugging.
.TP
.BI mmiobase= n
Specifies a fixed address for the card's memory mapped IO window.  The
default is to select any available memory window.
.TP
.BI srambase= n
Specifies a fixed address for the card's shared packet memory.  The
default is to select any available window below 1MB.
.TP
.BI ringspeed= n
Selects the network speed, in mb/sec.  Valid values are 4 or 16, and
the default is 16.
.SH AUTHOR
David Hinds \- dahinds@users.sourceforge.net
.SH "SEE ALSO"
cardmgr(8), pcmcia(5), ifport(8).
