.\" Copyright (C) 1998 David A. Hinds -- dahinds@users.sourceforge.net
.\" iflash2_mtd.4 1.7 2000/06/12 21:24:48
.\"
.TH IFLASH2_MTD 4 "2000/06/12 21:24:48" "pcmcia-cs"
.SH NAME
iflash2_mtd \- memory technology driver for Intel Series 2 flash
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B insmod iflash2_mtd.o
.RB [ pc_debug=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ mem_speed=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ word_width=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ vpp_timeout_period=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ vpp_settle=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ erase_timeout=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ erase_limit=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ retry_limit=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ max_tries=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ mem_speed=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ word_width=\c
.IR n ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Iflash2_mtd
is a memory technology driver for Intel Series 2 and Series 100 flash
devices.  Memory technology drivers are used by Card Services to
provide device-independent access for memory cards through bulk memory
services.  
.PP
Writing to Series 2 and Series 100 flash devices is very processor
intensive.  Individual words are written one at a time, at a speed of
roughly 10 us per word.  This busy period is too short to schedule
other processes to run, so the driver will not yield the processor
until an entire block is written.
.SH PARAMETERS
.TP
.BI pc_debug= n
Selects the PCMCIA debugging level.  This parameter is only available
if the module is compiled with debugging enabled.  A non-zero value
enables debugging.
.TP
.BI mem_speed= n
Sets the access speed of shared memory windows, in nanoseconds.  The
default is 0 (i.e., no extra wait states).  Values of up to 1000 are
legal.
.TP
.BI word_width= n
A flag indicating if memory windows should be configured for
8-bit (if 0) or 16-bit (if 1) transfers.  The default is 1 (16-bit).
.TP
.BI vpp_timeout_period= n
In milliseconds, this specifies the maximum idle period after a write
operation before programming power will be switched off.  The default
is 1000 ms.
.TP
.BI vpp_settle= n
In milliseconds, this gives a delay between when programming power is
switched on, and when the device is assumed to be powered up and ready
to receive erase or write commands.  The default is 100 ms.
.TP
.BI erase_timeout= n
In milliseconds, specifies the poll interval for monitoring the status
of a bulk erase operation.  The default is 100 ms.
.TP
.BI erase_limit= n
In milliseconds, specifies the maximum elapsed time before an erase
operation is assumed to have failed.  The default is 10000 ms.
.TP
.BI retry_limit= n
The maximum number of retries for a write operation.  The default is
4.
.TP
.BI max_tries= n
The maximum number of status register polls before a single word write
is assumed to have timed out.  The default is 4096.
.SH AUTHOR
David Hinds \- dahinds@users.sourceforge.net
.SH "SEE ALSO"
iflash2+_mtd(4), memory_cs(4).
