.\" Copyright (C) 1998 David A. Hinds -- dahinds@users.sourceforge.net
.\" ifport.8 1.9 2000/06/12 21:24:48
.\"
.TH IFPORT 8 "2000/06/12 21:24:48" "pcmcia-cs"

.SH NAME
ifport \- select the transceiver type for a network interface

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ifport
.I interface
.RB [ auto | 10baseT | 10base2 | aui | 100baseT | ## ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Ifport
sets the transceiver type for the specified network interface, for
drivers that support multiple transceiver types.  If a type is not
specified on the command line, then the current type is displayed.
The type can be specified either numerically or by keyword.  The five
standard transceiver types
.RB ( auto ,
.BR 10baseT ,
.BR 10base2 ,
.BR aui ,
and
.BR 100baseT )
correspond to codes 0 to 3, for all the Linux PCMCIA network drivers.
The keyword match is case insensitive.
.PP
The network drivers may not reconfigure a card for a new transceiver
type if the interface is already open.  It is best to invoke
.B ifport
prior to configuring the interface with
.B ifconfig
to ensure that the new setting takes effect immediately.
.PP
This utility only works with a limited set of 16-bit PC Card drivers:
.BR 3c589_cs ,
.BR nmclan_cs ,
.BR pcnet_cs ,
.BR smc91c92_cs ,
and
.BR xirc2ps_cs .
If invoked for other drivers,
.B ifport
may report bogus transceiver
settings, or report ``Operation not supported''.

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.TP
.B ioctl: Operation not supported
Indicates that this network device does not support manual transceiver
selection.  There may be only one transceiver option, or the device
may always autodetect the appropriate transceiver.

.SH AUTHOR
David Hinds \- dahinds@users.sourceforge.net
.SH "SEE ALSO"
ifconfig(8).
