.\" Copyright (C) 1999 David A. Hinds -- dahinds@users.sourceforge.net
.\" lspnp.8 1.4 2000/06/12 21:24:49
.\"
.TH LSPNP 8 "2000/06/12 21:24:49" "pcmcia-cs"
.SH NAME
lspnp \- list Plug and Play BIOS device nodes and resources
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lspnp
.RB [ -b ]
.RB [ -v [ v ]]
.RI [ "device ..." ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
This utility presents a formatted interpretation of the contents of the
.I /proc/bus/pnp
tree.  Its default output is a list of Plug and Play device node
numbers, product identifiers, and descriptions.  Verbose output
.RB ( -v )
includes resource allocations (IO ports, memory, interrupts, and DMA 
channels) for each device.  Very verbose output
.RB ( -vv )
includes lists of possible resources, various configuration flags, and
product identifiers for compatible devices.
.PP
The output can be limited to one or more specific device nodes by
specifying their two-digit hex node numbers on the command line.  By
default, current (dynamic) device configuration information is
displayed; with the
.B -b
option, the boot (static) configuration is shown.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-b
Boot mode: read device resource information that will be used at next
boot (as opposed to current resource info).
.TP
.B \-v
Selects more verbose output.  Can be used more than once.
.SH FILES
.TP \w'/usr/share/pnp.ids\ \ \ \ |\|'u
/usr/share/pnp.ids
A database of known Plug and Play device ID's.
.TP
/proc/bus/pnp/...
The kernel interface for Plug and Play BIOS device services.
.SH AUTHORS
David Hinds \- dahinds@users.sourceforge.net
.SH "SEE ALSO"
setpnp(8)
