.\" Copyright (C) 1998 David A. Hinds -- dahinds@users.sourceforge.net
.\" memory_cs.4 1.5 2000/06/12 21:24:48
.\"
.TH MEMORY_CS 4 "2000/06/12 21:24:48" "pcmcia-cs"
.SH NAME
memory_cb \- CardBus memory driver
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B insmod memory_cb.o
.RB [ pc_debug=\c
.IR n ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Memory_cb
gives direct memory access to the address spaces of CardBus cards.
It provides character-mode devices for accessing a card's PCI
configuration space, up to six mapped memory or IO regions, and its
expansion ROM space.
When loaded,
.B memory_cb
will allocate a free major device number.  For each card, it will
report which address spaces are available, and their sizes.  Minor
numbers have the form 'dddddsss', where 'ddddd' is the instance number
and 'sss' is the memory space for that instance.
When
.B memory_cb
is bound to a card, it will report its major and minor device numbers
to
.BR cardmgr (8).
.PP
The default memory card initialization script creates device special
files for all eight card address spaces, though for a particular card,
some of these may be unavailable.  These devices have the
following names: 
.TP
.I /dev/cbmem#s0
The card's PCI configuration space.
.TP
.I /dev/cbmem#s[1-6]
The IO or memory spaces mapped by the card's six Base Address
Registers.
.TP
.I /dev/cbmem#s7
The card's expansion ROM space.
.PP
The character special devices can be used to read and write arbitrary
numbers of bytes to arbitrary locations.  The
.B memory_cb
driver can be bound to any card regardless of function.
.SH PARAMETERS
.TP
.BI pc_debug= n
Selects the PCMCIA debugging level.  This parameter is only available
if the module is compiled with debugging enabled.  A non-zero value
enables debugging.
.SH AUTHOR
David Hinds \- dahinds@users.sourceforge.net
.SH "SEE ALSO"
cardmgr(8), pcmcia(5), memory_cs(4).
