.\" Copyright (C) 1998 David A. Hinds -- dahinds@users.sourceforge.net
.\" pcnet_cs.4 1.16 2000/09/19 17:08:45
.\"
.TH PCNET_CS 4 "2000/09/19 17:08:45" "pcmcia-cs"

.SH NAME
pcnet_cs \- generic NS8390-based PCMCIA Ethernet Driver

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B insmod pcnet_cs.o
.RB [ pc_debug=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ irq_list=\c
.IR i,j,... ]
.RB [ if_port=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ use_big_buf=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ use_shmem=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ mem_speed=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ delay_output=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ delay_time=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ hw_addr=\c
.IR n,n,n,n,n,n ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Pcnet_cs
is a driver for all NS8390-based PCMCIA ethernet cards.  It can use
either polled IO or a shared memory window to exchange data with the
card.  The driver first tests for a shared memory buffer, falling
back on polled IO if the memory test fails.  It replaces the
.B de650_cs
and
.B ibmcc_cs
drivers in previous releases.  When this driver is bound to a card, it
allocates the next available ethernet device
.RB ( eth0 .. eth# ).
This
device name will be reported in the kernel log file, and passed on to
.BR cardmgr (8).

.SH PARAMETERS
.TP
.BI pc_debug= n
Selects the PCMCIA debugging level.  This parameter is only available
if the module is compiled with debugging enabled.  A non-zero value
enables debugging.
.TP
.BI irq_list= i,j,...
Specifies the set of interrupts that may be allocated by this driver.
.TP
.BI if_port= n
Selects the transceiver type, for Socket EA and IBM CCAE cards.  1 is
10baseT (twisted pair), and 2 is 10base2 (BNC, or thin net).  The
default is 1 (10baseT).
.TP
.BI use_big_buf= n
For Socket EA cards, a flag indicating if the driver should use the
large (64K) packet buffer.  The default is 1 (true).
.TP
.BI use_shmem= n
Selects shared memory versus polled IO mode for packet transfers.  The
default is -1, meaning to use the card's CIS information to decide.
.TP
.BI mem_speed= n
Sets the access speed of the shared memory window, in nanoseconds.
The default is 0 (i.e., no extra wait states).  Values of up to 1000
are legal.
.TP
.BI delay_output= n
Specifies that a delay should be inserted after a polled IO block
output.  This is turned on by default for Accton and Socket EA cards.
.TP
.BI delay_time= n
Specifies the length of the
.B delay_output
delay, in microseconds.  The default is 4.
.TP
.BI hw_addr= n,n,n,n,n,n
For cards whose hardware ethernet addresses can't be identified by the
current driver, this is a hack for hardwiring a specific address.  The
argument should consist of exactly six byte-sized numbers, separated
by commas, with no spaces.  Numbers may be in decimal or hex ('0xNN').

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.TP
.B eth#: interrupt(s) dropped!
Indicates that the driver did not receive an interrupt notification
for some reason.  The driver will poll the card (with a significant
performance penalty) if the problem persists.  The most likely cause
is an interrupt conflict and/or host bridge configuration problem.

.SH AUTHOR
David Hinds \- dahinds@users.sourceforge.net

.SH "SEE ALSO"
cardmgr(8), pcmcia(5).
