.\" Copyright (C) 1999 David A. Hinds -- dahinds@users.sourceforge.net
.\" setpnp.8 1.3 2000/06/12 21:24:49
.\"
.TH SETPNP 8 "2000/06/12 21:24:49" "pcmcia-cs"
.SH NAME
setpnp \- modify Plug and Play BIOS device resources
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B setpnp
.RB [ -b ]
.I device resource...
.br
.B setpnp
.RB [ -b ]
.I device {on|off}
.SH DESCRIPTION
This utility updates the system resource information for Plug and Play
BIOS device nodes.  A device is specified by its two-digit hex node
number.  In its first form, a list of resources are given on the
command line.  Alternatively, a device can either be simply switched
``on'' (reset to its boot configuration) or ``off'' (all resources
disabled).
.PP
There are four types of resources: ``io'', ``mem'', ``irq'', and
``dma''.  A resource list consists of one or more space-separated
pairs of a resource type with one or more values.  Multiple values for
one resource type can be separated by commas.  Values can also either
be unitary or dash-separated ranges.  For example:
.sp
.RS
.nf
setpnp 0d io 0x2f8-0x2ff irq 3
setpnp 12 io 0x350-0x35f,0x2f8-0x2ff irq 3 irq 10
.RE
.fi
.sp
The order of items of different types is not important, but if more
than one item of the same type is present, their relative order is
significant.  The Plug and Play BIOS will reject invalid configuration
attempts; however,
.B setpnp
will not attempt to determine why a configuration was rejected.
.PP
By default, current (dynamic) device configuration information is
modified.  With the
.B -b
option, a device's boot (static) configuration can be updated.  Some
devices may only be reconfigured for the following boot.  Be especially
careful when modifying your system's boot configuration.  Improper use
of this command may disable vital system devices and render your
system unbootable. 
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-b
Boot mode: update the device resource information that will be used at
next boot (as opposed to current resource info).
.TP
.SH FILES
.TP \w'/proc/bus/pnp/...\ \ \ \ |\|'u
/proc/bus/pnp/...
The kernel interface for Plug and Play BIOS device services.
.SH AUTHORS
David Hinds \- dahinds@users.sourceforge.net
.SH "SEE ALSO"
lspnp(8)
