.\" Copyright (C) 1999 David A. Hinds -- dahinds@users.sourceforge.net
.\" smc91c92_cs.4 1.4 2000/06/12 21:24:48
.\"
.TH SMC91C92_CS 4 "2000/06/12 21:24:48" "pcmcia-cs"

.SH NAME
smc91c92_cs \- SMC 91cxx device driver

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B insmod smc91c92_cs.o
.RB [ pc_debug=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ if_port=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ irq_list=\c
.IR i,j,... ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Smc91c92_cs
is the low-level Card Services driver for SMC 91c92, 91c94,
91c96, and 91c100 based PC Card ethernet adapters.  When this
driver is attached to a card, it
allocates the next available ethernet device
.RB ( eth0 .. eth# ).
This
device name will be reported in the kernel log file, and passed on to
.BR cardmgr (8).
.PP
With the default transceiver setting, the driver will attempt to
continuously autodetect the transceiver type (10base2 or 10baseT).
There should normally only be a one or two second lag before the
correct transceiver is selected.  On particularly noisy or busy
networks, it is possible for the detection logic to incorrectly
toggle the transceiver type.  If this becomes a problem, it may be
necessary to explicitly select the interface type when the module is
loaded or with the 
.B ifport
command.

.SH PARAMETERS
.TP
.BI pc_debug= n
Selects the PCMCIA debugging level.  This parameter is only available
if the module is compiled with debugging enabled.  A non-zero value
enables debugging.
.TP
.BI if_port= n
Selects the transceiver type.  0 is autodetect (10baseT or 10base2),
1 is 10baseT (twisted pair), and 2 is 10base2 (BNC, or thin net).  The
default is 0 (autodetect).
.TP
.BI irq_list= i,j,...
Specifies the set of interrupts that may be allocated by this driver.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.TP
.B eth#: interrupt(s) dropped!
Indicates that the driver did not receive an interrupt notification
for some reason.  The driver will poll the card (with a significant
performance penalty) if the problem persists.  The most likely cause
is an interrupt conflict and/or host bridge configuration problem.

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.TP
.B eth#: interrupt(s) dropped!
Indicates that the driver did not receive an interrupt notification
for some reason.  The driver will poll the card (with a significant
performance penalty) if the problem persists.  The most likely cause
is an interrupt conflict and/or host bridge configuration problem.

.SH AUTHOR
David Hinds \- dahinds@users.sourceforge.net

.SH "SEE ALSO"
cardmgr(8), pcmcia(5), ifport(8).
