.\" Copyright (c) 1998 Donald Becker and David Hinds.
.\" tc574_cs.4 1.7 2001/06/22 01:12:38
.\"
.TH 3C574_CS 4 "$Date" "pcmcia-cs"

.SH NAME
3c574_cs \- 3Com 3c574 Etherlink XL 10/100 PC Card device driver

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B insmod 3c574_cs.o
[\fBpc_debug=\fIn\fR]
[\fBif_port=\fIn\fR]
[\fBirq_list=\fIi,j,...\fR]
[\fBfull_duplex=\fIn\fR]
[\fBauto_polarity=\fIn\fR]
[\fBmax_interrupt_work=\fIn\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB3c574_cs\fR is the low-level Card Services driver for the 3Com
3c574 EtherLink XL PCMCIA ethernet adapter.  When this driver is
attached to a card, it allocates the next available ethernet device
(\fBeth0\fR..\fBeth#\fR).  This device name will be reported in the
kernel log file, and passed on to \fBcardmgr\fR(8).
.PP
The driver uses the N-Way autonegotiating transceiver to negotiate the
speed and duplex of the network link.  If the link partner does not
support negotiation, only the link speed is detected.

.SH PARAMETERS
.TP
.BI pc_debug= n
Selects the PCMCIA debugging level.  This parameter is only available
if the module is compiled with debugging enabled.  A non-zero value
enables debugging.
.TP
.BI if_port= n
Selects the transceiver type.  Only 0, 1, and 4 are acceptable values, other
values return an error.  This actual value specificed is ignored -- the
autonegotiating transceiver selects the media speed and duplex used.
.TP
.BI irq_list= i,j,...
This option limits the set of interrupts that may be allocated by this driver.
The default is all normally-usable IRQs.
.TP
.BI full_duplex= n
This flag determines if only full-duplex modes are advertised.  It
defaults to 0 (false).
.TP auto_polarity= n
This flag can be used to control the transceiver's auto polarity
detection capability.  Some Cisco Catalyst switches are known to
interact badly with this feature in 10baseT mode.  It defaults to 1
(enabled).
.TP
.BI max_interrupt_work= work-limit
This option selects the maximum amount of work handled during each
interrupt.  Each received packet counts as one unit of work, as does
updating statistics counters and handling errors.  The default is 32.

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.TP
.B eth#: interrupt(s) dropped!
Indicates that the driver did not receive an interrupt notification
for some reason.  The driver will poll the card (with a significant
performance penalty) if the problem persists.  The most likely cause
is an interrupt conflict and/or host bridge configuration problem.

.SH AUTHOR
Driver core: Donald Becker \- becker@scyld.com
.PP
PC Card interface: David Hinds \- dahinds@users.sourceforge.net

.SH "SEE ALSO"
cardmgr(8), pcmcia(5), ifport(8).

