.\" Copyright (C) 1998 David A. Hinds -- dahinds@users.sourceforge.net
.\" tc589_cs.4 1.16 2000/06/12 21:24:48
.\"
.TH 3C589_CS 4 "2000/06/12 21:24:48" "pcmcia-cs"

.SH NAME
3c589_cs \- 3Com 3c589 Etherlink III device driver

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B insmod 3c589_cs.o
.RB [ pc_debug=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ if_port=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ irq_list=\c
.IR i,j,... ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B 3c589_cs
is the low-level Card Services driver for the 3Com 3c589
PCMCIA ethernet adapter and 3Com 3c562/3c563 combo cards.  When this
driver is attached to a card, it
allocates the next available ethernet device
.RB ( eth0 .. eth# ).
This
device name will be reported in the kernel log file, and passed on to
.BR cardmgr (8).
.PP
With the default transceiver setting, the driver will attempt to
continuously autodetect the transceiver type (10base2 or 10baseT).
There should normally only be a one or two second lag before the
correct transceiver is selected.  On particularly noisy or busy
networks, it is possible for the detection logic to incorrectly
toggle the transceiver type.  If this becomes a problem, it may be
necessary to explicitly select the interface
type when the module is loaded or with the
.B ifport
command.

.SH PARAMETERS
.TP
.BI pc_debug= n
Selects the PCMCIA debugging level.  This parameter is only available
if the module is compiled with debugging enabled.  A non-zero value
enables debugging.
.TP
.BI if_port= n
Selects the transceiver type.  0 is autodetect (10baseT or 10base2),
1 is 10baseT (twisted pair), 2 is
10base2 (BNC, or thin net). and 3 is AUI (thick ethernet).  The
default is 0 (autodetect).
.TP
.BI irq_list= i,j,...
Specifies the set of interrupts that may be allocated by this driver.

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.TP
.B eth#: interrupt(s) dropped!
Indicates that the driver did not receive an interrupt notification
for some reason.  The driver will poll the card (with a significant
performance penalty) if the problem persists.  The most likely cause
is an interrupt conflict and/or host bridge configuration problem.

.SH AUTHOR
David Hinds \- dahinds@users.sourceforge.net

.SH "SEE ALSO"
cardmgr(8), pcmcia(5), ifport(8).
