.\" Copyright (C) 1998 David A. Hinds -- dahinds@users.sourceforge.net
.\" tcic.4 1.17 2000/06/12 21:24:48
.\"
.TH TCIC 4 "2000/06/12 21:24:48" "pcmcia-cs"
.SH NAME
tcic \- Databook TCIC-2 PCMCIA controller driver
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B insmod tcic.o
.RB [ pc_debug=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ tcic_base=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ ignore=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ do_scan=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ irq_list=\c
.IR i,j,... ]
.RB [ cs_irq=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ poll_interval=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ poll_quick=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ cycle_time=\c
.IR n ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
This is the low-level driver for the Databook TCIC-2 PCMCIA host
controller family.  It is used by Card Services for programming the
TCIC-2 chip, and for monitoring card status change events.
.SH PARAMETERS
.TP
.BI pc_debug= n
Selects the PCMCIA debugging level.  This parameter is only available
if the module is compiled with debugging enabled.  A non-zero value
enables debugging.
.TP
.BI tcic_base= n
Sets the base I/O port address of the TCIC-2 chip.  The default is
0x240.
.TP
.BI ignore= n
Causes the driver to ignore a single socket.  Sockets are numbered
starting at 0.  The socket will be left in whatever state it was
already in, so it can be used for cards with point enablers that do
not cooperate with Card Services.
.TP
.BI do_scan= n
This flag specifies that all free interrupts should be tested to see
if they can be triggered by the PCMCIA controller.  The default is 1
(on). 
.TP
.BI irq_list= i,j,...
Specifies the set of interrupts that may be allocated by this driver,
if they are otherwise available.
The default list is 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, and 14. 
.TP
.BI cs_irq= n
Sets the interrupt line to use for monitoring card status changes.
The default is 0, which means pick any legal interrupt not already in
use.  Legal values are 14, 10, 7, 6, 5, 4, and 3.
.TP
.BI poll_interval= n
Sets the card status polling delay, in 1/100 second increments.  If
this parameter is set, card status interrupts will be disabled.  
.TP
.BI poll_quick= n
When a card status change interrupt is received, the TCIC-2 chip is
briefly polled for additional status changes.  This parameter sets the
polling delay, in 1/100 second increments.  The default is 5, meaning
0.05 seconds.
.TP
.BI cycle_time= n
Sets the length of a CCLK external clock cycle, in nanoseconds.  The
default is 70 ns, corresponding to a standard ISA 14.31818 MHz clock.
.SH AUTHOR
David Hinds \- dahinds@users.sourceforge.net
.SH "SEE ALSO"
cardmgr(8), pcmcia(5).
