.\" Copyright (c) 1995 Anthony D. Joseph <adj@lcs.mit.edu>
.\" Revisited by Jean II - HPLB - 96
.\" wavelan_cs.c.4
.\"
.TH WAVELAN_CS 4 "4/16/95" "MIT Lab. for Comp. Sci."
.\"
.\" NAME part
.\"
.SH NAME
wavelan_cs \- AT&T GIS WaveLAN PCMCIA device driver
.\"
.\" SYNOPSIS part
.\"
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B insmod wavelan_cs.o
.RB [ irq_list=\c
.IR i,j,... ]
.RB [ mem_speed=\c
.IR n ]
.RB [ do_roaming=\c
.IR n ]
.\"
.\" DESCRIPTION part
.\"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I wavelan_cs
is the low-level Card Services driver for the NCR / AT&T / Lucent
.B WaveLAN PCMCIA
and Digital (DEC)
.B RoamAbout DS
wireless ethernet adapter.  When this driver is attached to a card, it
allocates the next available ethernet device (eth0..eth#).  This
device name will be passed on to
.IR cardmgr (8)
for the card configuration, and reported in the kernel log file with
the MAC address, NWID and frequency used by the card.
.\"
.\" PARAMETER part
.\"
.SH PARAMETERS
.TP
.BI irq_list= i,j,...
Specifies the set of interrupts that may be allocated by this driver.
.TP
.BI mem_speed= n
Sets the access speed of the shared memory window, in nanoseconds.
The default is 0 (i.e., no extra wait states).
.TP
.BI do_roaming= n
Enables or disables roaming mode.  The default is 1 (roam).
.\"
.\" WIRELESS part
.\"
.SH WIRELESS EXTENSIONS
Use
.IR iwconfig (8)
to manipulate wireless extensions.
.\"	mode sub part
.SS Mode
Set the operating mode to  
.I Ad-Hoc
or
.IR Managed .
This in fact disable or enable roaming support. This setting is not
saved in hardware.
.\"	NWID sub part
.SS Network ID
Set the network ID 
.RI [ 0
to
.IR FFFF ]
or disable it
.RI [ off ]
or reenable it
.RI [ on ].
As the NWID is stored in the card Permanent Storage Area, it will be
reuse at any further invocation of the driver.
.\"	Frequency sub part
.SS Frequency & channels
For the 2.4GHz 2.00 Hardware, you are able to set the frequency by
specifying one of the 10 defined channels
.RI ( 2.412,
.I 2.422, 2.425, 2.4305, 2.432, 2.442, 2.452, 2.460, 2.462
or
.IR 2.484 )
or directly by its value. The frequency is changed immediately and
permanentely. Frequency availability depend on the regulations...
.\"	Sensitivity sub part
.SS Sensitivity
Signal level threshold for packet reception
.RI [ 0
to
.IR 63 ].
Should be set according to the ambiant noise level.
.\"	Encryption key sub part
.SS Encryption key
Set the encryption key
.RI [ 0
to
.IR FFFF-FFFF-FFFF-FFFF ].
Use
.RI [ off ]
and
.RI [ on ]
to disable and reenable the hardware encryption. This feature works
only for device with encryption option (DES or AES).
.\"	Spy sub part
.SS Statistics spy
Set a list of MAC addresses in the driver (up to 8) and get the last
quality of link for each of those (see
.IR iwspy (8)).
.\"	/proc/net/wireless part
.SS /proc/net/wireless
.I status
is the status reported by the modem.
.I Link quality
reports the quality of the modulation on the air (direct sequence
spread spectrum) [max = 16].
.I Level
and
.I Noise
refer to the signal level and noise level [max = 64].
The
.I crypt discarded packet
and
.I misc discarded packet
counters are not implemented.
.\"
.\" IOCTL part
.\"
.SH PRIVATE IOCTL
You may use
.IR iwpriv (8)
to manipulate private ioctls.
.\"	threshold part
.SS Quality threshold
Enable you the define the quality threshold used by the modem (packet
below that level are discarded).
.\"	Histogram part
.SS Histogram
This functionality allow to set a number of signal level intervals and
to count the number of packets received in each of those defined
intervals. This distribution might be used to calculate the mean value
and standard deviation of the signal level.
.\"
.\" OTHER part
.\"
.SH OTHER FEATURES
Hot unplug support.
.br
Power saving (use 'ifconfig down').
.\"
.\" SPECIFIC part
.\"
.SH SPECIFIC NOTES
This driver will fail to load some
.B non NCR/ATT&T/Lucent
Wavelan cards. If it's your case, you must look in the source code on
how to add your card to the detection routine.
.PP
Some of the mentioned features are optional. You may enable to disable
them by changing flags in the driver header and recompile.
.\"
.\" AUTHOR part
.\"
.SH AUTHOR
Anthony D. Joseph \- adj@lcs.mit.edu
.br
Jean Tourrilhes \- jt@hplb.hpl.hp.com
.br
(+ others - see source code for details)
.\"
.\" SEE ALSO part
.\"
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR wavelan (4),
.BR cardmgr (8),
.BR pcmcia (5),
.BR ifconfig (8),
.BR insmod (1),
.BR iwconfig (8),
.BR iwspy (8),
.BR iwpriv (8).
