.TH callback 8 "27 Oct 93" "greenie" "mgetty+callback manual"
.IX callback
.SH NAME
callback \- call a user back, presenting a login prompt
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B callback
.RB [ -x <debug level> ]
.RB [ -V ]
.RB [ -l <modem lines> ]
.RB [ -m <initstring> ]
.RB [ -s <speed> ]
.RB [ -d ]
.RB [ -S ]
.RI [ phone-number ]
...
.SH DESCRIPTION
Call the given phone number (if none is given on the command line, ask
user for one), and if a CONNECT is established, hand over control to
mgetty(8) to present user with a login name prompt.

.I callback
is used for various purposes:

* security: make sure your users are who they pretend to be by calling a
well-known phone number.

* cost savings: make your company call you back.

.I callback
can be called directly from the command line (but you must be "root" to do
this, otherwise callback can't signal mgetty), or from mgetty's
"login.config". See the login.config file shipped with mgetty for an
example.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.TP
.B -x <debug level>
Use the given level of verbosity for logging - 0 means no logging, 5 is
really noisy.
.TP
.B -V
Print version number and quit.
.TP
.B -d
Do not go into the background. This is helpful for debugging.
.TP
.B -l <modem lines>
Use the given modem lines. Multiple lines can be separated by ":", as with
sendfax(8). Example: callback -l tty1a:tty2a
.TP
.B -m <init sequence>
Set the modem initialization sequence (as usual: expect send expect ...).
This can do nearly everything, as long as it leaves the modem command
responses on (that is, no ATQ1 here!) and switches the modem to data mode
(AT+FCLASS=0) if it is used in data/fax mode.
.TP
.B -s <speed>
This is the bit rate that should be used for the machine-modem connection.
Usually you'll set this via the "speed <nnnn>" option in "callback.config".
.TP
.B -S
Use the line where callback is started from for dialing out. Callback can
make use of multiple modem lines, and with this options, you can force it
to use just one modem, the one where a call comes in.

.SH CONFIG FILE
.I callback
will read all its configuration at run-time from a file, usually called
@CONFDIR@/callback.config. See the documentation in the mgetty.info
manual for details.

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
In most cases,
.I callback
can't print any error messages to the console, because it must detach
itself immediately from the terminal, in case someone wants to be called
back on the modem line he called in. So, nothing to print messages to...

Because of this, all callback errors are logged to a protocol file (the
extent of the data written is controlled by the "-x" option), especially
including the reason why a call was not made, or what exactly failed.

Just two messages are printed on stdout, and those are self-explaining, a
call from a non-root user, and an invalid option.

.SH INTERNALS
How does it work?

This is a bit tricky, because of the way init(8) handles the utmp(5) file.
You can't just have any program ask the user for a login name, and then
start a "login shell", it won't work (this is for the same reason
.I mgetty(8)
has to be started from /etc/inittab).

So, mgetty has to do the "asking for login name". But I do not want to
have all that dialout code in mgetty, bloating it even more.

The way it works is this:
.I callback
dials out on a modem device. It will only take a modem device that has a
mgetty watching over it (!). When the connection is established (CONNECT),
.I callback
will send a signal SIGUSR1 to mgetty, which, in turn, will send the same
signal back to signal "I got your signal".
.I callback
then exits, and
.I mgetty
takes over the existing connection, prompts the user for a login name, 
and forks off @LOGIN@.

Conclusion: this will not work with mgetty versions before February 04,
1996 (no support for this signalling), and if it doesn't work for you,
please send me 
.B BOTH
the mgetty and the callback log file, otherwise it's very hard to find the
bugs.

.SH BUGS
.I callback
is "alpha" code, not very stable right now.

.I callback
is fairly dumb concerning retries.

.I callback
must be run as root.

Most of the documentation consists of "reading the source".

.SH "SEE ALSO"
mgetty(8), ct(1)
.SH AUTHOR
.I callback
is Copyright (C) 1993-1996 by Gert Doering, <gert@greenie.muc.de>.
