.\"             -*-Nroff-*-
.\"
.TH make.coverpg 1 "27 Oct 93" "greenie" "mgetty+sendfax manual"
.IX make.coverpg
.IX coverpg
.SH NAME
make.coverpg \- create a fax coverpg on stdout
.SH SYNOPSIS
make.coverpg [options] <pages> <sender-ID> <sender-NAME> <receiver-ID> <receiver-NAME> <date> <time>
.SH DESCRIPTION
.IX fax
.I "make.coverpg "
is called from faxspool(1) to generate a cover page for the just-processed
fax. It has to create a proper G3 file (e.g. via pbm2g3(1) or
hp2hig3(1) or ghostscript(1)) and output that on stdout. If the program doesn't
exist, or can't be executed, the fax simply won't get a coverpage (so, if
you don't want a fax coverpage, do not install it...)

.I make.coverpg
can put anything it wants on the page, but note that there are certain
legal requirements in certain countries about the contents that *have* to
be on the cover page, for example, the fax phone number of the sender and
the recepient, the number of pages, or similar things.

.I make.coverpg
gets the informations about the fax to be sent from the command line, in
the order listed above.

If the environment variable
.I normal_res
is set to something non-empty, 
.I faxspool
requests that
.I make.coverpg
creates a cover page in normal resolution (98 lpi). Default is fine
resolution (196 lpi).

.B NO
.I make.coverpg
program is installed by default, since everyones needs differ too wildly.

Some sample coverpage programs are provided in the mgetty source tree, in
the samples/ subdirectory (coverpg.pbm shows how to do it with 
"pbmtext|pbm2g3", coverpg.ps shows how I do it with ghostscript).

In this directory, you can also find two shell scripts (fax and faxmemo)
that will take advantage of one more esoteric feature of my coverpage
programs: if called with the option "-m <memo-file>", the sample programs
will put a text file "<memo-file>" on the cover page (used for short notes
or such). To make use of it,
.I faxspool
is called with the option '-C "make.coverpg -m <memo-file>"' (the double
quotes are needed!).

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
none

.PP
.SH "Example"
A five-page fax sent from me to my second number could result in a call like this:

make.coverpg 5 "+49-89-3243328" "Gert Doering" "3244814" "myself" "Sep 15 94" "22:10:00"

.SH FILES
.TP
.B @LIBDIR@/make.coverpg
the program itself
.fi

.SH "SEE ALSO"
faxspool(1), pbm2g3(1), ghostscript(1)

.SH AUTHORS
The idea behind
.I make.coverpg
is Copyright (C) 1993 by Gert Doering, <gert@greenie.muc.de>, the
implementation will most likely have yours...
