.TH fax 1 "23 Nov 02" "greenie" "mgetty+sendfax manual"
.IX fax
.SH NAME
fax \- fax sending and receiving with mgetty+sendfax
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B faxspool
.RB [options]
.RI phone-number
.RI file
...

.B faxrm
.RI job-id

.B faxq
.RB [options]

.B faxrunq
.RB [options]

.B faxrunqd
.RB [options]

.B sendfax
.RB [options]
.RI phone-number
.RI file
...

.B mgetty
.RB [options]
.RI tty

.B pbm2g3
.RB [options]
.RI [pbm-file]

.B g32pbm
.RB [options]
.RI [pbm-file]

.B g3cat
.RB [options]
.RI [g3-file(s)]

.SH DESCRIPTION
This manpage very briefly describes every program from the mgetty+sendfax
fax/modem software suite. For details, see the manpages for each program.

.I faxspool
is used to queue jobs for later transmission by fax.
.I faxspool
accepts different input formats, converts them into the proper format
required by
.I sendfax
and places the jobs into the outgoing spool directory.

.I faxq
displays the current FAX work queue.

.I faxrm
removes one or more jobs from the current fax work queue. You have to
specify the job id (returned by faxq) on the command line.

.I faxrunq
processes all the faxes in the fax work queue, and sends them one-by-one.
If transmission isn't possible, the job will be retried later. While meant
to be run from 
.I cron,
.I faxrunq
can as well be started from the shell (but you must have access to the fax 
queue and the modems, which means you must be 'root' or '@FAX_OUT_USER@')

.I faxrunqd
is a replacement for 
.I faxrunq
to be used in environments that send a high number of faxes per day, or
need more flexibility.

.I sendfax
is the backend used by faxrunq for actually sending the fax. It is not
meant to be ever called directly, but can be used in own applications.

.I faxq-helper
is a helper program that is used by
.I faxspool,
.I faxq
and
.I faxrm
to access the fax spool directory (which is not world-writeable since
mgetty version 1.1.29).


.sp
.I mgetty
is the part of the program suite that handles incoming calls. Data calls
are handled as 
.I getty
does it (login, shell), while fax calls are handled internally. The
received faxes are stored in @FAX_SPOOL_IN@. See the mgetty(1) manpage for
details.
.I mgetty 
can not be called directly, it must be called by /etc/init.

.sp
.I pbm2g3 
is used to convert portable bitmaps to G3 fax data (for sendfax). Do not
use the pbmtog3 program from the pbmplus or netpbm toolkit, it will create
broken G3 data.

.I g32pbm
is used to convert received faxes (which are stored in G3 format) to
portable bitmap format. PBM can be converted to other formats with the
named pbmplus toolkit.

.I g3cat
is used to concat multiple G3 files, as
.I cat
does with text files.

.SH FILES
.TP
.B @FAX_SPOOL_OUT@/
outgoing fax spool directory
.TP
.B @FAX_SPOOL_IN@/
incoming faxes
.TP
.B @LIBDIR@/
The cover page program, faxq-helper, and a few font files live here.
.TP 
.B @CONFDIR@/
most configuration files for mgetty and sendfax live here.
.TP
.B @SBINDIR@
mgetty, sendfax and faxrunqd live here
.TP
.B @BINDIR@
all the other programs
.TP
.B @CONFDIR@/faxaliases
global fax alias file
.TP
.B $HOME/.faxnrs
private fax alias file
.TP
.B @CONFDIR@/fax.allow
list of allowed users
.TP
.B @CONFDIR@/fax.deny
list of denied users
.TP
.B @CONFDIR@/faxheader
fax page header
.TP
.B @LIBDIR@/make.coverpg
program to create fax cover page (see coverpg(1)).
.TP
.B @CONFDIR@/login.config
login configuration file for mgetty.
.TP
.B @CONFDIR@/dialin.config
caller ID setup file for mgetty (optional).
.TP
.B @CONFDIR@/mgetty.config
runtime configuration file for mgetty (not implemented yet).
.TP
.B @CONFDIR@/sendfax.config
runtime configuration file for sendfax (optional).
.fi

.SH BUGS
Look into the responding man pages.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
faxspool(1), faxq(1), faxrunq(1), faxrunqd(8), sendfax(8), faxrm(1), mgetty(8),
pbm2g3(1), g32pbm(1), g3cat(1), faxqueue(5), mgettydefs(4), coverpg(1)

mgetty.info
.SH AUTHOR
The
.I mgetty+sendfax
program suite is Copyright (C) 1993-2002 by Gert Doering, <gert@greenie.muc.de>. 
Parts of the programs kindly donated by Chris Lewis, Paul Sutcliffe,
Klaus Weidner, and numerous others.
