.TH faxrunqd 1 "23 Nov 02" "greenie" "mgetty+sendfax manual"
.IX faxrunqd
.SH NAME
faxrunqd \- daemon to send fax jobs queued by faxspool(1)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B faxrunqd [-v] [-d] [-l <ttys>] [-u <user>] [-V]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Runs in the background, and regularily checks the fax queue set up by
faxspool(1).  Sends all jobs that are due, records results, and takes
appropriate action (notify mails etc).

.I faxrunqd
basically does the same as faxrunq(1), just more so.  Please read the
faxrunq(1) man page if you're not already familiar with the concept.

The advantages of
.I faxrunqd
are:

- runs all the time, so you don't have to set up a cron job (but you have
to set up an entry in /etc/inittab or start it from /etc/rc*)

- quicker response to new faxes in queue

- can sensibly handle more than one modem

- can handle prioritized fax jobs

- can do 'policy routing' of faxes depending on the fax number

The disadvantages are:

- needs more system ressources if you have only little fax traffic

- requires Perl 5.004

- more tricky to set up and to debug

.SH SETUP

.I faxrunqd
is started at system boot from /etc/rc.*, or from /etc/inittab.  You can
also start it from the command line. It does
.B not
put itself in the background, so you have to start it with an "&", or from
a ":respawn:" line in /etc/inittab.   Using /etc/inittab has the advantage
that
.I faxrunqd
is restarted automatically if something goes wrong and faxrunqd is
stopped.

.I faxrunqd
will first read a global configuration file (see below), then (optionally)
the faxrunqd policy file (see further below).  From then on, it will sit
in a loop. It will check the fax queue every 60 seconds for new jobs, and
will then distribute them over all available modems.  If the job is sent,
or fails, it will do the same thing
.I faxrunq(1)
would do (send a mail, delete the JOB directory, execute a named program,
etc.).  Both programs are fully compatible in this respect.

.B faxrunqd [-v] [-d] [-l <ttys>] [-u <user>] [-V]
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -v
Tells
.I faxrunqd
to write progress information to the log file.
.TP
.B -d
Tells
.I faxrunqd
to write debugging information to stdout and the log file (usually used
together with -v)
.TP
.B -l <ttyS>
Specifies the list of modem devices to use.  Multiple devices are
separated with ':', e.g. '-l ttyS0:ttyS1'.
.TP
.B -u <user>
.I faxrunqd
can now (since 1.1.29) run as unprivileged user.  If you start it as root
from /etc/inittab or from one of the /etc/rc* scripts, it's strongly
recommended to use '-u @FAX_OUT_USER@' (to be precise: the user that is 
owning the outgoing fax spool directory).  This will make 
.I faxrunqd
drop all its privileges at startup, and run as the specified user.  Running
.I faxrunqd
as root user might lead to security problems - don't do it.
.TP
.B -V
print version number and exit

.SH CONFIGURATION FILE

Some aspects of the behaviour of 
.I faxrunqd
can be controlled by a configuration file, usually named 
@CONFDIR@/faxrunq.config (this is the same file that
.I faxrunq(1)
uses, but there are additional options for
.I faxrunqd).  In
this file, you can use the following options:
.TP
.B success-send-mail [y/n]
A boolean parameter that controls whether a mail will be sent after
successful completition of the fax job.

.TP
.B failure-send-mail [y/n]
A boolean parameter that controls whether a mail will be sent after
the fax job has failed more than the maximum number of times.

.TP
.B success-call-program <name>
Here, you can specify a program that will be run when the fax has been
successfully sent. It will be passed two command line parameters. The
first is the full path to the fax JOB file (see faxq(5)), the second
is the last exit code from
.I sendfax
(for success-call-program, this is always "0").

.TP
.B failure-call-program <name>
Similar to the "success-call-program", this program will be run when the
fax has been failed too often and 
.I faxrunqd
gives up. This script could, for example, print out the fax on a printer
so that it can be sent manually on a paper fax machine.

.TP
.B update-call-program <name>
This is, again, similar to "success-call-program".  It will be called for
interim status updates ("we've tried and it was BUSY"), so that frontend
programs can display this information.  "update-call-program" will only
be called for jobs that will be
.I kept
in the fax queue for at least one more try.

.TP
.B maxfail-costly <n>
This specifies the number of times that a fax may fail "fatally", that
is, causing telephone costs (explained above). The default value is 5.

.TP
.B maxfail-total <m>
This is the absolute maximum number of times that 
.I faxrunqd
will try to send any given fax. The default value is 10.

.TP
.B delete-sent-jobs [y/n]
Determines whether
.I faxrunqd
should delete jobs after sending, or leave them in the fax queue (while
moving the "JOB" file to "JOB.done") so that they can be seen at by
"faxq -o". The default value is "do not delete sent faxes".

.TP
.B acct-log <path>
Specifies where
.I faxrunqd
should protocol success and failure of each try to send a fax job.
The default location is @FAX_SPOOL_OUT@/acct.log.

.LP
The options that are specific to
.I faxrunqd
are:

.TP
.B fax-devices [tty(s)]
Specifies which ttys should be used for sending jobs.  
.I faxrunqd
will always explicitely tell
.I sendfax
which modem to use, so the settings in sendfax.config are ignored.
If you use policy routing (see below), this applies only to fax jobs that
do not have a tty set by faxrunqd.policy.

.TP
.B faxrunqd-log [filename]
Specifies where logging information is written to.  This is only used if
.I faxrunqd
is called with the
.B -v
or
.B -d
option.

.TP
.B policy-config [filename]
Specifies a file containing rules for "policy routing", see below.
Default is "no file".

.TP
.B faxrunqd-max-pages [n]
If this is set to something greater 1 (default is 10), 
.I faxrunqd
will combine multiple jobs to the same receipient telephone number into
one telephone call.  The maximum number of pages that the resulting job
may have is specified here.  Usually it makes no sense to increase this,
but in some surroundings it might make sense to turn off this feature by
setting it to 1.

.TP
.B sendfax-tty-map [tty] [program path] [args]
Some special cases might require running a non-default
.I sendfax
binary for specific ttys (like "testing new version" or "some other
call-compatible sendfax applications for non-class-2 modems").  If you 
want mappings for more than one "special" tty devices, just use the
option multiple times.  Example: 

sendfax-tty-map capi0 /usr/sbin/sendfax.capi


.SH POLICY ROUTING
.I faxrunqd
can do some things differently, depending on the phone number where the
fax is supposed to be sent to.  For example, this might be useful to:

- send in-house faxes over a specific modem connected to a PABX (to avoid
paying telco charges)

- send long-distance faxes to the US over a special LD provider, that is,
use a specific dial-prefix for those

- use extra high debugging when sending to a known-to-be problematic
receipient

etc.

This feature is controlled by a file, containing match / substitute
rules.  The name of the file is specified with the "policy-config"
option in faxrunq.config.

The file is read from top to bottom.  Each line starting with a "#" sign
is a comment, and is skipped.  In every other line, the first field of
the line is interpreted as a "match" clause, and compared to the
telefone number of an to-be-sent fax job.  Regular expressions can be
used (see perlre(1)).

If the telefone number is matched, the second field is used to
substitute parts of the telefone number, for example, cut off a local
prefix, or change a digit, or whatever.  If you do not want any
substitutions, put a "-" in that field.

The third field specifies the tty lines to use for faxes matched by this
line (for example, you might have one modem connected to a long-distance
provider, and others for local use or so).  Put a "-" in this field if
you want to use the default fax modems.

The remaining part of the line are appended to the sendfax command line.
With those, you can set a different dial-string ("-D ATD"), or a higher
debug level ("-x 9"), or whatever else you can imagine. Do NOT set a
tty to use here ("-l ttyS1"), because that would confuse the internal
tty handling of
.I faxrunqd,
leading to weird effects processing the fax queue!!

Examples:

# 12345-nnn is sent to "nnn" over a local PABX, modem on tty2

^12345		s/12345//	tty2

# fax to 56789 (exact match) is sent with higher debugging

^56789$		-		-	-x 8


.SH FILES
.TP
.B @FAX_SPOOL_OUT@/stop
if this file exists, 
.I faxrunqd
will stop whatever it's doing at the moment, wait for all outstanding
jobs, and then fall asleep until the file is removed.  You can use this 
to stop queue processing while testing something, or if you know that 
the modem(s) are unavailable and do not want to run into any error 
messages, etc.

.TP
.B @FAX_SPOOL_OUT@/faxqueue_done
Every time
.I faxrunqd
runs the fax queue, a time stamp is written into that file.
It is used by
.I faxspool
to display a warning if the queue hasn't been run recently (so faxes may
get stuck).

.SH SIGNALS
To control
.I faxrunqd's 
behaviour, you can send it the following signals:

.TP
.B SIGINT
.TP
.B SIGTERM
remove lock file, remove pid file, terminate immediately.

.TP
.B SIGHUP
finish all fax jobs that are currently being sent, then terminate  (this
is used to signal faxrunqd "I want you to terminate" without disturbing
the normal flow of operation - SIGINT/TERM etc. can lead to some faxes being
sent twice).

.TP
.B SIGUSR1
close, roll, and re-open log file.

.TP
.B SIGUSR2
dump current modem success/failure statistics to log file.

.IX fax
.SH BUGS
.I faxrunqd
does not report if a modem goes bad - instead it will just stop using it
(which is good for reliable faxing, but bad for error recovery).

.SH "SEE ALSO"
faxspool(1), sendfax(8), faxq(1), faxrunq(1), faxqueue(5)
.SH AUTHOR
.I faxrunqd
is Copyright (C) 1997-2004 by Gert Doering, <gert@greenie.muc.de>.  It was
inspired by Bodo Bauer's initial faxrunqd, but completely rewritten.
