.\"             -*-Nroff-*-
.\"
.TH g3cat 1 "27 Oct 93" "greenie" "mgetty+sendfax manual"
.IX g3cat
.SH NAME
g3cat \- concatenate multiple g3 documents
.SH SYNOPSIS
g3cat [\-l] [\-a] g3-file1 ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.IX "Group 3 fax"
.IX fax
.I "g3cat "
concatenates g3 files. These can either be 'raw', that is,
bitmaps packed according to the CCITT T.4 standard for one-dimensional
bitmap encoding, or 'digifax' files, created by GNU's GhostScript
package with the
.B "digifax "
drivers. Its output is a concatenation of all the input files, in raw G3
format, with two white lines in between.
.sp
If a \- is given as input file, stdin is used.
.sp
If the input data is malformed, a warning is printed to stderr, and the
output file will have a blank line at this place.

.PP
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B "\-l "
separate files with a one-pixel wide black line.
.TP
.B "\-h <blank lines>"
specifies the number of blank lines
.I g3cat
should prepend to each page. Default is 0.
.TP
.B "\-L <lines>"
limit lenght of output page to maximum <lines> lines.
.SH SPECIAL-CASE OPTIONS
.TP
.B "\-w <width>"
specifies the desired page width in pixels per line. Default is 1728 PELs,
and this is mandatory if you want to send the fax to a standard fax machine.
If one of the input files doesn't match this line width (for example because
it was created by a broken G3 creator), a warning is printed, and the line
width is transparently fixed.
.TP
.B "\-a "
byte-align the end-of-line codes (EOL) in the file. Every EOL will end at
a byte boundary, that is, with a \001 byte.
.TP
.B "\-p <pad>"
specifies a minimum number of bytes that each output line must be padded
to.  Padding is done with 0-bits before the EOL code.
.TP
.B "\-R"
suppress output of end-of-page code (RTC).

.PP
.SH "Example"
The following example will put a header line on a given g3 page, 'page1'
and put the result into 'page2':

echo '$header' | pbmtext | pbm2g3 | g3cat \- page1 >page2

.SH FILES
.ta
--
.fi

.SH BUGS
Hopefully none :-).

.SH "SEE ALSO"
g32pbm(1), sendfax(8), faxspool(1)

.SH AUTHORS
.I g3cat
is Copyright (C) 1993 by Gert Doering, <gert@greenie.muc.de>
