.TH mgetty 8 "27 Oct 93 - 21 Jul 98" "greenie" "mgetty+sendfax manual"
.IX mgetty
.SH NAME
mgetty \- smart modem getty
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mgetty
.RB [ options ]
.RI ttydevice
.RI [ gettydefs ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Mgetty is a ``smart'' getty replacement, designed to be used with hayes
compatible data and data/fax modems.
Mgetty knows about modem initialization, manual modem answering (so your
modem doesn't answer if the machine isn't ready), UUCP locking (so you can
use the same device for dial-in and dial-out).
Mgetty provides very extensive logging facilities.

This manpage doesn't try to detail mgetty setup in detail, it just lists
the most important options. For detailed instructions, see the info file
mgetty.info (mgetty.texi).

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -k <space>
Tells
.I mgetty
to leave <space> kbytes free on disk when receiving a fax.
.TP
.B -x <debug level>
Use the given level of verbosity for logging - 0 means no logging, 9 is
really noisy. The log file is usually /tmp/log_mg.<device>
.TP
.B -s <speed>
Set the port speed to use, e.g. "-s 19200".
.TP
.B -r
Tells
.I mgetty
that it is running on a direct line. UUCP locking is done, but no modem
initialization whatsoever.
.TP
.B -p <login prompt>
Use the given string to prompt users for their login names. Various
tokens are allowed in this string. These tokens are: @ for the system
name, \\n, \\r, \\g, \\b, \\v, \\f, \\t for newline, carriage return, bell,
backspace, vertical tab, form feed, and tab, respectively.
\\P and \\L will expand to the tty name ("ttyS0"). \\Y will give the Caller
ID, \\I the "CONNECT foobar" string returned
by the modem, and \\S will output the port speed.
\\s, \\m, \\V, \\R represent the operating system, the hardware name,
the OS version, the OS release.
\\N and \\U give the number of users currently logged in.
\\C will be changed into the result of ctime(), and \\D and \\T will
output the date and time, respectively. Finally, \\<digit> will use digit
as octal/decimal/hexadecimal representation of the character to follow.

The default prompt is specified at compile time.
.TP
.B -n #
Tells
.I mgetty
to pick up the phone after the #th RING. Default is 1.
.TP
.B -R <t>
Tells
.I mgetty
to go into "ringback" (aka "ring-twice") mode. That means: the first call
is never answered, instead the caller has to hang up after the phone
RINGs, wait 30 seconds, and then call again in the next <t> seconds for
mgetty to pick up. If no call comes, mgetty will exit.

I do not really recommend using this, better get a second phone line for
the modem.
.TP
.B -i <issue file>
Output <issue file> instead of /etc/issue before prompting for the user
name. The same token substitutions as for the the login prompt are done
in this file.
.TP
.B -D
Tells
.I mgetty
that the modem is to be treated as a DATA modem, no fax initalization is
attempted.
.TP
.B -F
Tells
.I mgetty
that DATA calls are not allowed and the modem should be set to Fax-Only.
.TP
.B -C <class>
Tells
.I mgetty
how to treat the modem. Possible values for <class> are "auto" (default,
try to find out whether the modem supports fax), "cls2" (use the class 2
fax command set, even if the modem supports class 2.0), "c2.0" (use the
class 2.0 fax command set), "data" (data only, exactly as the -D switch).
.TP
.B -S <g3 file>
If a call comes in and requests fax polling,
.I mgetty
will send the named file. Note: not all fax modems support poll
sending.
.TP
.B -I <fax id>
Use the given fax station ID for fax identification. Not used for data
modems.
.TP
.B -b
Open the port in blocking mode. Best used in combination with "-r". This
is the default if
.I mgetty
is called as
.I getty.
You may want to use this if you want to make use of the two-device /
kernel-locking scheme of the Linux and SunOS operating systems
(/dev/ttyS.. and /dev/cua..). I do not recommend it, it's just include for
completeness, and to be able to use mgetty as a full-featured getty
replacement.
.TP
.B -a
Use autobauding. That is, after a connection is made,
.I mgetty
parses the "CONNECT foo" response code of the modem and sets the port
speed to the first integer found after the "CONNECT" string, "foo" in this
example. You need this if your modem insist on changing its DTE speed to
match the line speed. I recommend against using it, better leave the port
speed locked at a fixed value. The feature is included because there
exist old modems that cannot use a fixed (locked) port speed.
.TP
.B -m 'expect send ...'
Set the "chat sequence" that is used to initialize the modem. For an empty
expect part, use empty double quotes (""). Since the sequence contains
spaces, you have to enclose all of it in single quotes(''). Example:

mgetty -m '"" ATH0 OK'

.SH FILES
.TP
.B @CONFDIR@/mgetty.config
Main configuration file.
.TP
.B @CONFDIR@/login.config
controls whether (and when)
.I mgetty
should call some other program for user login instead of @LOGIN@. How this
is done is explained in this file.
.TP
.B @CONFDIR@/dialin.config
controls acceptance/denial of incoming calls based on the caller's number.
Available only if you have "caller ID" and your modem supports it.
.TP
.B @NOLOGIN@
controls whether mgetty should pick up the phone upon incoming calls. If
the file exists, calls are completely ignored. You can use this, for
example, to stop mgetty during day time, and let it pick up at night only,
by creating and removing @NOLOGIN@ via the 
.I cron
program at the appropriate time.
.TP
.B /etc/issue
will be printed after a connection is established, and before the
'login:' prompt.  Usually contains a 'Welcome' message. Can be changed 
with the '-i' option.
.TP
.B @LOG_PATH@
Debug log file, see below.

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
If
.I mgetty
doesn't work the way it should, the main source of diagnostic data is the
.I log file.
It can be found in "@LOG_PATH@" (for the mgetty process handling 
"ttyxx").  If it doesn't contain enough details, enhance the log level with
the '-x' option to mgetty, e.g. "-x 5".

Many of the common problems and solutions are discussed in the mgetty
manual and the FAQ.  Please see the WWW page at 
http://alpha.greenie.net/mgetty/ for both.


.SH BUGS
Not all of
.I mgetty
configuration can be done at run-time yet. Things like flow control and
file paths (log file / lock file) have to be configured by changing the
source and recompiling.

Users never read manuals...

.SH "SEE ALSO"
g32pbm(1), sendfax(8), getty(8), mgettydefs(4), mgetty.info
.SH AUTHOR
.I mgetty
is Copyright (C) 1993 by Gert Doering, <gert@greenie.muc.de>.
