.TH sendfax 8 "27 Oct 93" "greenie" "mgetty+sendfax manual"
.IX sendfax
.SH NAME
sendfax \- send group 3 fax files (G3 files) with a class 2 faxmodem
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sendfax
.RB [ -p ]
.RB [ -x <debug level> ]
.RB [ -v ]
.RB [ -l <modem lines> ]
.RB [ -m <initstring> ]
.RB [ -d <poll directory> ]
.RB [ -C <modem class> ]
.RB [ -S ]
.RB [ -n ]
.RB [ -r ]
.RB [ -D <dial prefix> ]
.RI phone-number
.RI [ g3file(s) ]
...
.SH DESCRIPTION
Send the named g3 fax files to the fax machine at "phone number". The g3
files can be created with pbm2g3(1) or GNU's GhostScript with the
"digifax" driver.
.IX "Group 3 fax"
.IX fax
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -p
Tells
.I sendfax
to try fax polling, that is, get any documents queued in the remote fax
machine for you (used for weather maps and the like)
.TP
.B -x <debug level>
Use the given level of verbosity for logging - 0 means no logging, 5 is
really noisy.
.TP
.B -v
Give some progress report on stdout.
.TP
.B -l <modem lines>
Use the given modem lines. Multiple lines can be separated by ":".
Example: sendfax -l tty1a:tty2a
.TP
.B -m <initstring>
Send an additional init string. This string is sent right after
initializing the modem and setting it into class 2 mode. You can use
this to set the speaker value, some special registers, whatsoever. The
modem must return "OK". If it returns "ERROR", sendfax prints an error
message and aborts.
You do not have to prepend the "AT" prefix, but it won't do harm either.
.TP
.B -d <directory>
Specify the directory where polled fax files should go to. Defaults to "."
for the current directory. Unused if not polling a fax.
.TP
.B -C <class>
Tells
.I sendfax
how to treat the modem. Possible values for <class> are "auto" (default,
try to find out which fax command set the modem supports), "cls2" (use
the class 2 fax command set, even if the modem claims to support class 2.0)
and "c2.0" (use the class 2.0 fax command set). Obviously, "data" (which
is valid for "mgetty -C ...") is not of much use here.
.TP
.B -S
Assume modem connection on stdin, do not try to lock or initialize
anything. To take over existing connection (for interworking with
vgetty et.al.) use with a dial string of "T1" (just a short beep, no
phone number at all would confuse many modems, a pulse dialed number
may confuse the telco switch) and "-m ATX1" (do not wait for dial
tone).
.TP
.B -n
Tells
.I sendfax
to send the fax pages in ``normal'' (204x98 dpi) mode. Default is ``fine''
mode (204x196 dpi).
.TP
.B -r
If this option is given,
.I sendfax
will rename all the fax G3 files to ``<filename>.done'' after successfully
sending this. This is intended to be used from ``faxrunq'', to make sure
that a partially-sended fax isn't retransmitted as a whole every time.

If this option is set, sendfax will not (!) complain if not all files named
on the command line exist.
.TP
.B -D <dial prefix>
Override the default (set by sendfax.config or in policy.h) for the 'ATxxx'
command to dial the remote number.  This is rarely used from the command
line, but you might want to use it in combination with faxrunqd's policy 
routing option (see example in faxrunqd.policy(5)).
.TP
.B -M <max speed>
Sets the maximum transmission (modem to modem) speed.  This is only needed
in very rare cases, because normally the modems negotiate the correct 
speed automatically.  Example: "-M 7200".

.SH CONFIG FILE
If compiled accordingly,
.I sendfax
can read all its configuration from at run-time from a file, usually
called @CONFDIR@/sendfax.config. See the documentation in the mgetty.info
manual for details.

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.I sendfax
returns an error code, according to the reason why the program terminated.
If everything went OK,
.I sendfax
returns 0. If ``harmless'' errors (didn't cost money) occured, an error
code below 10 is returned. If a dial attempt failed after the remote end
picked up (it will cost money), a return code of 10 or higher is returned.

In Detail, the return codes are as follows:
.RS
.IP 0
all pages have been transmitted successfully
.IP 1
error on the sendfax command line
.IP 2
cannot open fax device (e.g. due to locked modem)
.IP 3
cannot initialize modem (e.g. modem switched off)
.IP 4
dialup failed with BUSY
.IP 5
dialup failed with NO DIALTONE
.IP 10
dialup failed with ERROR or NO CARRIER (modem handshake failed)
.IP 11
waiting for XON failed (rarely seen)
.IP 12
transmitting or polling page(s) failed (connection dropped)
.RE

Very detailed debug information is written to the log file.  It can be
found in "@FAX_LOG@". If it doesn't contain enough details, enhance the 
log level with the "-x" option to sendfax, e.g. "-x 5".

Many of the common problems and solutions are discussed in the mgetty
manual and the FAQ.  Please see the WWW page at 
http://alpha.greenie.net/mgetty/ for both.


.SH REFERENCES
The standard for Group 3 fax is defined in CCITT Recommendation T.4.
.SH BUGS
.I sendfax
should be able to put a header on the page.

.I sendfax
should be able to read TIFF g3 input files.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
g3cat(1), pbm2g3(1), mgetty(1), faxspool(1), faxrunq(1), faxrunqd(8)
.SH AUTHOR
.I sendfax
is Copyright (C) 1993 by Gert Doering, <gert@greenie.muc.de>.
