.TH sff2g3 1 "17 Jul 04" "greenie" "mgetty+sendfax manual"
.IX sff2g3
.SH NAME
sff2g3 \- convert CAPI SFF fax files into G3 fax files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sff2g3
.RB [ -r ]
.RB [ -d ]
.RB [ -v ]
.B input.SFF output.%03d.g3 
.SH DESCRIPTION
Reads a Common ISDN API (CAPI) structured file format (SFF) input file,
and converts every fax page contained in it to a raw G3 fax file.

The input SFF files typically come from fax reception programs using CAPI on
active ISDN cards (isdn4linux, AVM or DIVA cards) or similar.  The output
G3 files are in the ``native'' format that all other G3 utilites in the
mgetty+sendfax package use.

If the input file name is ``-'',
.B sff2g3
will read from stdin.

The output file name should contain a ``%d'' or ``%03d'' part.  It will be
replaced with the current page number.  If there is no page number field,
only the last page in the SFF file will be saved.
.IX "Group 3 fax"
.IX fax
.IX SFF
.IX CAPI
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -r
reverse the bit order in the bytes of the output G3 file.  The input bit
order is fixed.
.TP
.B -d
will one day make sff2g3 prepend a digifax header to the page.
.TP
.B -v
verbose mode - show what's going on.  Multiple
.B -v
arguments increase debug output level.

.SH REFERENCES
The standard for Group 3 fax is defined in CCITT Recommendation T.4.  The
SFF file format is specified in the CAPI specs (http://www.capi.org).
.SH BUGS
The \-d option isn't implemented yet.

The output file name is not yet robust against format string attacks.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
g32pbm(1), pbm(5)
.SH AUTHOR
.I sff2g3
is Copyright (C) 2004 by Gert Doering, <gert@greenie.muc.de>.
