.if n .ds Q \&"
.if t .ds Q ``
.if n .ds U \&"
.if t .ds U ''
.TH "frox.conf" 5 
.tr \&
.nr bi 0
.nr ll 0
.nr el 0
.de DS
..
.de DE
..
.de Pp
.ie \\n(ll>0 \{\
.ie \\n(bi=1 \{\
.nr bi 0
.if \\n(t\\n(ll=0 \{.IP \\(bu\}
.if \\n(t\\n(ll=1 \{.IP \\n+(e\\n(el.\}
.\}
.el .sp 
.\}
.el \{\
.ie \\nh=1 \{\
.LP
.nr h 0
.\}
.el .PP 
.\}
..
.SH NAME

.Pp
frox.conf - configuration file for frox ftp proxy.
.SH DESCRIPTION

.Pp
The frox configuration file consists of a series of
option settings. Each setting consists of a (case
insensitive) option name, followed by the value(s) for that
option.
.Pp
Values are separated from each other and their option
name by whitespace. Optiions which are strings (eg. 
filenames, usernames etc.) may be quoted with \&"\&" if they
contain whitespace. Blank lines and lines beginning with a #
are ignored.
.Pp
For documentation on individual options please read the
sample config file which is well documented
.SH RE-READING

.Pp
If the configuration file is changed and frox is send
SIGHUP then some parts of it may be reread.
.Pp
Options which require special privileges(eg. Chroot, User,
TransparentData) and options which refer to the file system
(eg. LogFile, CacheDir). will not be changed. If the program
is running chrooted and with dropped priviledges then it is
probably unable to change these, and I don't want to give
incentives to run it as root. 
.Pp
.Pp
Note that in order to find the config file for rereading it
should a) be readable by the user which frox drops to, b) be
within the chroot jail, and c) have been specified with an
absolute path.
.SH SEE ALSO

.Pp
frox(8)
.SH AUTHOR

.Pp
James Hollingshead <frox at hollo.org>