.\" $Id: siggen.8,v 1.9 1994/07/25 15:46:22 gkim Exp $
.\"
.TH SIGFETCH 8 "October 14, 1992"
.SH NAME
siggen \- signature gathering routine for Tripwire
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B siggen
siggen [-0123456789aqv] [ 
.I file 
\&... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
\fIsiggen\fP is a utility that fetches signatures used by Tripwire.
.SH OPTIONS
.LP
When run without any arguments, \fIsiggen\fP collects all the signatures
on the specified files in a verbose manner.
.LP
When no arguments are given, \fIsiggen\fP reads from standard input.
.TP 
.B \-h
prints the signature in hexadecimal instead of base-64.
.TP 
.B \-q
Quiet mode.  Prints out all signatures in one line with no extraneous
information.
.TP 
.B \-a
Generates all signatures.  (default)
.TP
.B \-v
Verbose mode.  (default)
.TP
.B \-0
signature 0 - generates null signature
.TP
.B \-1
signature 1 - generates MD5, the RSA Data Security, Inc. Message Digesting Algorithm.
.TP
.B \-2
signature 2 - generates Snefru, the Xerox Secure Hash Function.
.TP
.B \-3
signature 3 - generates CRC-32, POSIX 1003.2 compliant 32-bit Cyclic Redundancy Check.
.TP
.B \-4
signature 4 - generates CRC-16, the standard (non-CCITT) 16-bit Cyclic Redundancy Check.
.TP
.B \-5
signature 5 - generates MD4, the RSA Data Security, Inc. Message Digesting Algorithm.
.TP
.B \-6
signature 6 - generates MD2, the RSA Data Security, Inc. Message Digesting Algorithm.
.TP
.B \-7
signature 7 - generates SHA, the NIST Secure Hash Algorithm (NIST FIPS 180)
.TP
.B \-8
signature 8 - generates Haval, a 128-bit signature code
.TP
.B \-9
signature 9 \- generates null signature (reserved for future expansion)
.SH AUTHORS
.nf
Gene Kim
Purdue University
gkim@cs.purdue.edu
.fi


