.\" .IX pvf
.TH "pvfmix" "1" "1.4" "pvfmix" "PVF tools"
.SH "NAME"
\fBpvfmix\fR \- mixes two voice files.
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
pvfmix [options] [<pvffile in> [<pvffile out>]]

.SH "DESCRIPTION"
\fIpvfmix\fR  mixes two voice files into one voice file. Input and output is in the pvf (portable voice format) format.  Both input file must have the same sample rate.  The sample rate of the output file will be the same as the sample rate of the input files.
.SH "OPTIONS"
pvfmix can be called in the pipe mode:

	cat infile.pvf | pvfmix [optons] > outfile.pvf

or with two file names:

	pvfmix [options] infile.pvf outfile.pvf

Valid options are:

\-h     brief help message

\-N <s> name of the voice file to add (default is none)

\-a     output pvf ascii format

\-b     output pvf binary format (default)

\-8     output 8 bit samples

\-16    output 16 bit samples

\-32    output 32 bit samples (default)

You will normaly use pvfmix with the \-N option.
.SH "EXAMPLES"
Combind two pvf files into one file.

	pvfmix \-N infile2.pvf infiel1.pvf outfile.pvf

or

	cat infile1.pvf | pvfmix \-N infile2.pvf > outfile.pvf

If you are trying to combind two files of different sample rates, you can combind pvfspeed with pvfmix.  If you have one file sampled at 11000 and one at 7200 and you want the output file at 7200 for your modem, you can use something like this:

	pvfspeed \-s 7200 infile1.pvf | \\

	pvfmix \-N infile2.pvf > outfile.pvf




.SH "SEE ALSO"
pvfamp, pvfcut, pvfechot, pvfff, pvffile, pvffilter, pvfnoise, pvfreverse, pvfsine, and pvfspeed
.SH "AUTHOR"
Mikkel L. Ellertson <mikkel@infinity\-ltd.com>
